blog: What's new in axum 0.5 (#645)
tokio-rs/website: content/blog/2022-03-whats-new-in-axum-0-5.md

---
date: "2022-04-31"
title: "What's new in axum 0.5"
description: "March 31, 2022"
---

> Today, we're happy to announce [axum] version 0.5. axum is an ergonomic and
> modular web framework built with tokio, tower, and hyper.

Reviewer: nit: personally, I would either capitalize or use code formatting for library names:
```suggestion
Today, we're happy to announce [`axum`] version 0.5. `axum` is an ergonomic and
modular web framework built with `tokio`, `tower`, and `hyper`.
```

0.5 contains lots of new features and I'd like highlight a few of them here.

## The new [`IntoResponseParts`] trait

> axum has always supported building responses by composing individual parts:

Reviewer: nit: again, slight pref for 
```suggestion
`axum` has always supported building responses by composing individual parts:
```

```rust
use axum::{
    Json,
    response::IntoResponse,
    http::{StatusCode, HeaderMap},
};
use serde_json::json;

// returns a JSON response
async fn json() -> impl IntoResponse {
    Json(json!({ ... }))
}

// returns a JSON response with a `201 Created` status code and
// a custom header
async fn json_with_status_and_header() -> impl IntoResponse {
    let mut headers = HeaderMap::new();
    headers.insert("x-foo", "custom".parse().unwrap());

    (StatusCode::CREATED, headers, Json(json!({})))
}
```

> However you couldn't easily provide your own custom response parts. axum had to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, you couldn't easily provide your own custom response parts. `axum` had to
```
or maybe:
```suggestion
Previously, however you couldn't easily provide your own custom response parts. `axum` had to
```

> specifically allow `HeaderMap` to be included in responses and you couldn't

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specifically allow `HeaderMap` to be included in responses, and you couldn't
```

extend this system with your own types.

> The new `IntoResponseParts` trait fixes that!

Reviewer: nit, take it or leave it: might be cool if this was a docs link?

Author: Yep! Will do when its shipped.

> For example, we can add our own `SetHeader` type for setting a single header and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, we can add our own `SetHeader` type for setting a single header, and
```

implement `IntoResponseParts` for it.

```rust
use axum::{
    response::{ResponseParts, IntoResponseParts},
    http::{StatusCode, header::{HeaderName, HeaderValue}},
};

struct SetHeader<'a>(&'a str, &'a str);

impl<'a> IntoResponseParts for SetHeader<'a> {
    type Error = StatusCode;

    fn into_response_parts(
        self,
        mut res: ResponseParts,
    ) -> Result<ResponseParts, Self::Error> {
        let name = self.0.parse::<HeaderName>()
            .map_err(|_| StatusCode::INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR)?;

        let value = self.1.parse::<HeaderValue>()
            .map_err(|_| StatusCode::INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR)?;

        res.headers_mut().insert(name, value);

        Ok(res)
    }
}
```

We can now use `SetHeader` in responses:

```rust
use axum::{Json, response::IntoResponse, http::StatusCode};
use serde_json::json;

async fn json_with_status_and_header() -> impl IntoResponse {
    (
        StatusCode::CREATED,
        SetHeader("x-foo", "custom"),
        SetHeader("x-bar", "another custom header"),
        Json(json!({})),
    )
}
```

> `IntoResponseParts` is also implemented for [`Extension`] making it easy to set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`IntoResponseParts` is also implemented for [`Extension`], making it easy to set
```

> response extensions, for example to share state with middleware:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
response extensions. For example, this can be used to share state with middleware:
```

```rust
use axum::{Extension, Json, response::IntoResponse};
use serde_json::json;

async fn json_extensions() -> impl IntoResponse {
    (
        Extension(some_value),
        Extension(some_other_value),
        Json(json!({})),
    )
}
```

See [`axum::response`] for more details.

## Cookies

> Building on top of `IntoResponseParts` [axum-extra] has a new [`CookieJar`]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building on top of `IntoResponseParts` [`axum-extra`], has a new [`CookieJar`]
```

extractor:

```rust
use axum_extra::extract::cookie::{CookieJar, Cookie};
use axum::response::IntoResponseParts;

async fn handler(jar: CookieJar) -> impl IntoResponse {
    if let Some(cookie_value) = jar.get("some-cookie") {
        tracing::info!(?cookie_value);
    }

    let updated_jar = jar
        .add(Cookie::new("session_id", "value"))
        .remove(Cookie::named("some-cookie"));

    (updated_jar, "response body...")
}
```

> It also comes in a [`SignedCookieJar`] variant that will sign cookies with a key so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also comes in a [`SignedCookieJar`] variant that will sign cookies with a key, so
```

you're sure someone hasn't tampered with them.

`IntoResponseParts` makes this possible without requiring any middleware.

See [`axum_extra::extract::cookie`] for more details.

## `HeaderMap` extractor

You've always been able to use [`HeaderMap`] as an extractor to access headers
from the request. But what you might not realise is that this would implicitly

> consume the headers such that other extractors wouldn't be able to access them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
consume the headers, such that other extractors wouldn't be able to access them.
```

> For example this is subtly broken:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, this is subtly broken:
```

```rust
use axum::{http::HeaderMap, extract::Form};

async fn handler(
    headers: HeaderMap,
    form: Form<Payload>,
) {
    // ...
}
```

Since we run the `HeaderMap` first, `Form` would be unable to access them and

> fail with a `500 Internal Server Error`. This was quite surprising and caused

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fail with a `500 Internal Server Error`. This was quite surprising, and caused
```

headaches for some users.

> However in axum 0.5 this problem goes away and it just works!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in `axum` 0.5 this problem goes away and it just works!
```

## More flexible `Router::merge`

> [`Router::merge`] can be used to merge two routers into one. In axum 0.5 its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`Router::merge`] can be used to merge two routers into one. In axum 0.5, it has
```

> gotten slightly more flexible since it now accepts any `impl Into<Router>`. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gotten slightly more flexible, and now accepts any `impl Into<Router>`. This
```

> allows you to have custom ways of constructing `Router`s and have them work
> seamlessly with axum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allows you to have custom ways of constructing `Router`s, and have them work
seamlessly with `axum`.
```

One could imagine a way to compose REST and gRPC like so:

```rust
let rest_routes = Router::new().route(...);

// with `impl From<GrpcService> for Router`
let grpc_service = GrpcService::new(GrpcServiceImpl::new());

let app = Router::new()
    .merge(rest_routes)
    .merge(grpc_service);
```

## Honorable mentions

> The following features weren't new in 0.5 but shipped recently and are worthy of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following features weren't new in 0.5, but shipped recently and are worthy of
```

a shout out.

### `middleware::from_fn`

> axum uses the [`tower::Service`] trait for middleware however it can be little
> daunting to implement, mainly due to the lack of async traits in Rust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`axum` uses the [`tower::Service`] trait for middleware. However, it can be little
daunting to implement, mainly due to the lack of async traits in Rust.
```

But with [`axum::middleware::from_fn`] you can hide all that complexity and use a
familiar async function:

```rust
use axum::{
    Router,
    http::{Request, StatusCode},
    routing::get,
    response::IntoResponse,
    middleware::{self, Next},
};

async fn my_middleware<B>(
    req: Request<B>,
    next: Next<B>,
) -> impl IntoResponse {
    // transform the request...

    let response = next.run(request).await;

    // transform the response...

    response
}

let app = Router::new()
    .route("/", get(|| async { /* ... */ }))
    // add our middleware function
    .layer(middleware::from_fn(my_middleware));
```

> The [documentation for middleware] has also been reworked and goes into more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [documentation for middleware] has also been reworked, and goes into more
```

details about the different ways to write middleware, when to pick which
approach, how ordering works, and more.

### Type safe routing

> In axum-extra we're experimenting with "type safe routing". The idea is is to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `axum-extra`, we're experimenting with "type safe routing". The idea is is to
```

Reviewer: also, it could be cool to link to a tracking issue or discussion or something about the experimental feature?

establish a type safe connection between a path and the corresponding handler.

> Previously it was possible to add a path like `/users` and apply a `Path<u32>`
> extractor, which would always fail at runtime since the path doesn't contain any
> parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, it was possible to add a path like `/users` and apply a `Path<u32>`
extractor, which would always fail at runtime, since the path doesn't contain any
parameters.
```

> We can use axum-extra's type safe routing to make that problem go away:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use `axum-extra`'s type safe routing to make that problem go away:
```

Reviewer: also, maybe consider:
```suggestion
We can use axum-extra's type safe routing to prevent that problem at compile-time:
```

> ### Type safe routing
> 
> In axum-extra we're experimenting with "type safe routing". The idea is is to
> establish a type safe connection between a path and the corresponding handler.
> 
> Previously it was possible to add a path like `/users` and apply a `Path<u32>`
> extractor, which would always fail at runtime since the path doesn't contain any
> parameters.
> 
> We can use axum-extra's type safe routing to make that problem go away:
> 
> ```rust
> use serde::Deserialize;
> use axum::Router;
> use axum_extra::routing::{
>     TypedPath,
>     RouterExt, // for `Router::typed_get`
> };
> 
> // A type safe path

Reviewer: in general, i think "type-safe" is normally hyphenated? but i could be convinced otherwise
```suggestion
### Type-safe routing

In axum-extra we're experimenting with "type-safe routing". The idea is is to
establish a type-safe connection between a path and the corresponding handler.

Previously it was possible to add a path like `/users` and apply a `Path<u32>`
extractor, which would always fail at runtime since the path doesn't contain any
parameters.

We can use axum-extra's type-safe routing to make that problem go away:

```rust
use serde::Deserialize;
use axum::Router;
use axum_extra::routing::{
    TypedPath,
    RouterExt, // for `Router::typed_get`
};

// A type-safe path
```

#[derive(TypedPath, Deserialize)]
#[typed_path("/users/:id")]
struct UsersMember {
    id: u32,
}

// A regular handler function that takes `UsersMember` as the
// first argument and thus creates a typed connection between
// this handler and the `/users/:id` path.
async fn users_show(path: UsersMember) {
    tracing::info!(?path.id, "users#show called!");
}

let app = Router::new()
    // Add our typed route to the router.
    //
    // The path will be inferred to `/users/:id` since `users_show`'s
    // first argument is `UsersMember` which implements `TypedPath`
    .typed_get(users_show);
```

> The key here is that our `users_show` function doesn't have any macros so IDE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key here is that our `users_show` function doesn't have any macros, so IDE
```

integration continues to work great.

See [`axum_extra::routing::TypedPath`] for more details.

## Updating

> axum 0.5 also contains a few breaking changes but I'd say they're all fairly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`axum` 0.5 also contains a few breaking changes, but I'd say they're all fairly
```

minor. Don't hesitate to reach out if you're having trouble upgrading or have
questions in general! You can find us in the `#axum` channel in the [Tokio Discord
server][discord].

<div style="text-align:right">&mdash; David Pedersen (<a href="https://twitter.com/davidpdrsn">@davidpdrsn</a>)</div>

[documentation for middleware]: https://docs.rs/axum/latest/axum/middleware/index.html
[discord]: https://discord.gg/tokio
[`IntoResponseParts`]: TODO

> [axum]: https://crates.io/crates/axum
> [`Extension`]: TODO
> [`axum::response`]: TODO
> [axum-extra]: https://crates.io/crates/axum-extra

Reviewer: (if you apply my formatting suggestions):
```suggestion
[`axum`]: https://crates.io/crates/axum
[`Extension`]: TODO
[`axum::response`]: TODO
[`axum-extra`]: https://crates.io/crates/axum-extra
```
